Highway revisited (#12)
CasperLabs/highway: highway.tex

%
In a situation where more than $1/3$ of nodes suffered (even for a few seconds) from such a network issue, protocols in the classical BFT model are not guaranteed to function properly.

On the other hand, besides these occasional offline periods, it is fair to assume that in a real-world system an overwhelming fraction, if not all, of the nodes honestly follow the protocol rules.
%
This is a consequence of the financial incentives for honest participation.
%
Indeed, it is in the best interest of committee members to make sure they actively participate in the consensus protocol, as they are paid a salary for honest work and are penalized for being offline or not contributing enough to the protocol progress.
%
In fact, because of penalties for protocol offences, it is highly unlikely that an adversary tries an attack which is not guaranteed to succeed, as otherwise it risks significant losses.
For the proof of the main liveness result -- Theorem~\ref{thm:liveness} -- to go through, we need the following requirement to be satisfied: 

%

> Therefore, with the only exception of large-scale, coordinated attacks that are intended to bring down the whole system, one should always expect almost all nodes to behave honestly.

Author: No, it does not have such a requirement. I guess this sentence is an introduction to the idea that during times when almost all the nodes behave honestly, blocks get super-finalized, so they are very hard to retract later (require much more than 1/3 malicious nodes).

> Motivated by this realization there has been several works that design protocols which are safe in the classical sense while at the same time trying to offer better guarantees in "typical" scenarios.

Author: fixed

%
In this paper we propose a new protocol -- Highway -- that contributes to this line of work.
%

> The security of Highway is still formalized on grounds of the partially synchronous BFT model, thus in particular it achieves safety and liveness in the most demanding setting when $1/3$ of all nodes are byzantine.

Author: fixed all instances

%
However, on top of that, Highway offers the following two features that make it particularly attractive in real-world deployments.
%

> First of all, in periods of honest participation of a large fraction of nodes, it allows to reach finality of blocks with "confidence" much higher than the typical threshold of $1/3$.

Reviewer: I agree.  Here's how this online LaTeX tool renders it `"test"`: 

![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\text{"test"})

> First of all, in periods of honest participation of a large fraction of nodes, it allows to reach finality of blocks with "confidence" much higher than the typical threshold of $1/3$.

Author: fixed all instances

%
The nodes participating in Highway might be configured with different security trade-offs between the allowed number of byzantine and crashing nodes (nodes that might go offline but are otherwise honest) in the protocol.
%
Flexibility then means that despite these differences in configuration, all the nodes run a single version of the protocol and perform the same actions, only the finality decisions they make depend on the chosen parameters.
%
A practical consequence is that nodes with lower security thresholds might reach finality much faster than nodes with higher thresholds, but as long as both these nodes' assumptions are satisfied they finalize the same blocks and stay in agreement.
    
Technically, Highway can be categorized as a DAG-based protocol~\cite{moser1999byzantine,zamfir2018casper,baird2016hashgraph,GLSS19}, in which nodes jointly maintain a common history of protocol messages, forming a directed acyclic graph representing the causality order.
%
In its design, Highway derives from the CBC-Casper protocol~\cite{zamfir2018casper} and significantly improves upon it by the use of a new finality mechanism, message creation schedule and spam prevention mechanism.
%

> We believe that the conceptual simplicity of DAG-based protocols along with the desirable practical features of the Highway protocol make it a solid choice for a consensus engine in a proof of stake based blockchain. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We believe that the conceptual simplicity of DAG-based protocols along with the desirable practical features of the Highway protocol make it a solid choice for a consensus engine in a Proof of Stake-based blockchain. 
```

\section{Our Results}

\subsection{Model}

> We consider a system with a fixed set $\mathcal{V}$ of $n$ validators, each of them equipped with public key that is known to other nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We consider a system with a fixed set $\mathcal{V}$ of $n$ validators, each of them equipped with a public key that is known to other nodes.
```

Author: done

> This model matches the scenario of 'permissioned blockchain', but the protocol can be applied to semi-permissionless scenario as well by rotating the set of validators.

Reviewer 2: We could follow the [Overleaf recommendations for quotations](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/typesetting_quotations).

Author: I changed all quotations to the proper format.

Our model makes the following assumptions:
\begin{itemize}
    \item\emph{(Reliable point-to-point communication)}
    We assume that channels do not drop messages and all messages in the protocol are authenticated by digital signature of the sender.

>     % Validator receives a message from another validator if and only if the latter sent it and intended it to be received by the former. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe remove this comment; seems to be a reformulation of the previous statement.

Author: Yeah, it's the previous version of that statement. Removed now

In the process, they enclose transactions into blocks forming a blockchain, in which each block refers to its predecessor by hash.
The first one, the \emph{genesis block}, is part of the protocol definition. 

In Highway, as the set of validators is either constant or subject only to very controlled changes (between different eras, see Subsection \ref{sec:eras}), specific validators are directly appointed to construct a block in a given time slot.
They do so by enclosing transactions from their local queue and hash of the block that they believe should be the predecessor.

As it may happen that validator does not refer to the last constructed block (either intentionally, or due to the network failure), the set $\mathcal{B}$ of blocks is a tree, with a unique path leading from each block to the root: the genesis block $G$. 
The main goal of the consensus protocol in such a scenario is to choose a single branch from such a tree.
For a block $B$, we refer to all the blocks that are on the other branches as \emph{competing} with $B$, as if any of them would be chosen, $B$ could not.

\subsection{Practical challenges}

> {\bf Strong optimistic finality.} While since the initial definition of the partially synchronous model by Dwork, Lynch and Stockmeyer~\cite{DLS88} the vast body of research was created to optimize various parameters of protocols in this setting, most of it was written under the semi-formal assumption that the existence of more than $n/3$ dishonest nodes predates the existence of any provable guarantees for such protocols.

Reviewer 2: "the vast body" → "a vast body"?
"predates" → "precedes"? (Not sure… need a native speaker… @xcthulhu?)

Reviewer: "predates" is correct.

I don't think we should use the phrase "vast body" here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{\bf Strong optimistic finality.} Partially synchronous consensus protocols originate with Dwork, Lynch and Stockmeyer~\cite{DLS88}. Most subsequent research has been into optimizing various parameters of protocols in this setting. This work generally assumes, semi-formally, that less than $n/3$ nodes are dishonest. However most publications predate the existence of any provable guarantees for such protocols.
```

Author: As the proposition of @xcthulhu has different meaning, I'm leaving as it is with the only change of "the vast body" -> "a vast body". The meaning of the original version was that the papers semi-fomrally assume that nothing can be proven in the presence of more than $n/3$ dishonest nodes.

Such an assumption stems from the fact that, as proven in the original paper, it is not possible for a partially synchronous protocol to guarantee both liveness and finality if $n<3f+1$.

In spite of this negative result, it is however possible to provide additional finality guarantees in the scenario where for a prolonged period even dishonest nodes do not deviate from the protocol and actively work to finalize blocks.

> Although it may not seem like an important observation from the perspective of classical security models, we stress that it carries significant practical consequences -- in most cases of blockchain deployments it may be assumed that most of the time basically all the nodes will actively collaborate to achieve consensus\footnote{As most systems rewards and punishes validators based on their behavior, offline nodes and small-scale attacks (ones that do not succeed in reverting a finalized block) are strongly disincentivised and hence not common.}.

Reviewer 2: "systems rewards and punishes" → "systems reward and punish"

It is hence possible to provide much stronger finality guarantees for blocks created during such periods, so to revert them much more than $n/3$ validators would have to collude.

{\bf Flexibility.}
Once the classical $n<3f+1$ bound is left aside, a natural tradeoff between finality and liveness occurs -- the stronger finality guarantee we require, the more validators need to honestly collaborate to finalize the block with such a guarantee.
The tradeoff could be resolved by all the validators agreeing on a common finality threshold that they intend to use, but such solution would have significant limitations.

> In Highway, however, there is no need to agree upon a common threshold, so every validator is able to use a different one, or even several different thresholds.

Reviewer 2: I think in a permissioned setting, a _validator_ doesn't even have to pick any threshold at all, and every _observer_ can choose theirs.

> Besides eliminating the need to make an additional consensus on this particular hyperparameter, one important implication of such feature is that it allows validators to play slightly different roles in the ecosystem -- for example some validators may deal mainly with finalizing relatively small transactions, in which case small latency is more important than very high security (and, as will become apparent after the protocol is presented, reaching higher thresholds usually takes more time), while others can prioritize safety over latency\footnote{In fact, in Highway the choice of specific threshold influences only local computations performed by a validator on the output of its communication with other validators. Hence, if validators would hand such communication logs to outside observers, observers could reinterpret the logs using different thresholds.} .

Reviewer 2: "hyperparameter" → "parameter"? (Seems to have connotations from statistics that we don't mean here.)

Reviewer 2: ~I'd also rather talk about observers or "nodes" here than validators.~
(Ah, I see you clarify that in the footnote…)

\subsection{Our contribution}
We present Highway - a consensus protocol achieving strong optimistic finality that is flexible by allowing validators to use different confidence thresholds to convince themselves that a given block is 'finalized' (both confidence threshold and finality will be properly defined in Subsection \ref{sec:finality}). 

Unless some validators actively deviate from the protocol, the finality of a block can only increase for a given validator, which intuitively corresponds to the ever-increasing number of confirmations for a block in PoW scenario.
However, unlike in PoW, in Highway the confidence levels for a given block can be directly interpreted as the number of validators that would need to misbehave in order to reverse such a block, what we formalize as the following theorem:

\begin{theorem}[\bf Finality]\label{thm:finality}
If an honest validator reaches finality with confidence threshold $t\geq f$ for a given valid block $B$, then no honest validator will ever reach finality with confidence threshold $t$ for a block competing with $B$.
\end{theorem}

> Note that while due to the aforementioned impossibility result \cite{DLS88} it is not possible to prove the liveness for confidence threshold $\frac{n}{3}$ and higher, in practice the vast majority of validators will not deviate from the protocol most of the times.

Reviewer 2: "prove the liveness" → "prove liveness"?

\begin{theorem}[\bf Liveness]\label{thm:liveness}
For every confidence threshold $0 \leq t < \frac{n}{3}$, if $f\leq t$ and $c< \frac{n-3t}{2}$, then the chain of blocks finalized with confidence $t$ grows indefinitely for each honest validator.
\end{theorem}

\subsection{Related work}

The line of work on partially synchronous protocols was initiated with the seminal work of Dwork, Lynch and Stockmeyer \cite{DLS88}, and gained popularity with the introduction of PBFT\cite{CL99} protocol and its numerous versions\cite{BKM18, KADCW09, MNR19}. 
Classically, protocols in this model attain resilience against less than $n/3$ malicious nodes, due to a known bound stating that is it not possible to provide both safety and liveness with higher number of Byzantine faults \cite{DLS88}.
Some of the works however explore the concept of 'flexibility' understood usually as providing the strongest $n/3$ security in the general partially synchronous model, and additional guarantees in case some additional conditions, such as network synchronicity or limited adversarial behavior, are met.

> Gasper\cite{BHKPQRSWZ18}, the newly proposed candidate for Ethereum 2.0 consensus mechanism, analyzed the case of an additional guarantees in case the network satisfies synchronicity assumptions. Later very similar considerations got a proper formal treatment with the introduction of the snap-and-chat family of protocols\cite{NNT20}.

Reviewer 2: "an additional guarantees" → "an additional guarantee" or "additional guarantees"

As in practical deployment assuming network synchronicity requires rather pessimistic assumptions about network latency, the second finality can be assumed to progress significantly slower. 
The provided construction is very modular and allow to use wide variety of protocols to provide for the first and second finality levels, and the consistency between both levels is guaranteed.

Protocol that carries perhaps the most similarities with Highway when it comes to achieved security guarantees is Flexible BFT\cite{MNR19}.
It defines the new type of faulty node, the alive-but-corrupt node, that fully cooperates with honest nodes unless it is able to perform a successful attack on protocol safety.
Intuitively, it models the practical situation in which nodes without an explicit incentive do not cheat, as that would mean loosing rewards in the PoS system. 
Similarly as in Highway, the protocol is able to tolerate much more adversarial nodes if they do not aim to merely break the liveness, but are interested only in breaking safety - the bounds match the bounds in our paper. 

> Flexibile BFT also introduces, as the name suggests, certain flexibility for the nodes when it comes to choosing the parameters related to the finality - each of the nodes can have independent assumptions about number of faulty nodes of each kind, and it is guaranteed that two honest nodes with correct assumptions can't finalize competing blocks, and if all nodes have correct assumptions, the protocol will continue making progress.

Reviewer 2: "Flexibile" → "Flexible"

The biggest conceptual difference is that in Flexible BFT, assumptions held by nodes explicitly influence their behavior in the protocol, while in Highway the assumed confidence threshold influences only the local computations performed on the DAG which form is not influenced by specific choices of confidence thresholds made by validators. 
There are two main consequences of this difference. First, in Highway validators can update their confidence thresholds and they are able to recompute finality of all of the blocks without the need of communicating with other validators, while in case of Flexible BFT that would require rerunning the whole protocol. 

> Second, perhaps even more importantly, Flexible BFT can stall in case some of the honest incorrectly assume number of faulty parties, while Highway never stalls.

Reviewer 2: > while Highway never stalls

Well… if ≥n/3 are faulty, everyone sees either inconsistent finalized blocks (safety failure) or a stalled network (liveness failure) or both.

Author: Ok, I agree that it was borderline incorrect, so I'm changing it into "Second, perhaps even more importantly, Flexible BFT can stall for everyone in case some of the honest validators incorrectly assume the number of faulty parties.
In contrast, in Highway unit production never stalls, and the consensus may stall from the perspective of a given validator only if that specific validator made incorrect assumptions on the number of faulty parties."
Also, it seems that the word 'validators' was missing in the last sentence of the previous version.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, thanks! :+1:

> To illustrate this difference, consider the scenario in which there is a big group of overly-conservative honest nodes incorrectly assuming that $90\%$ of the nodes are honest -- in such scenario in Flexible BFT even less conservative honest nodes will not be able to finalize blocks, while less conservative honest validators in Highway will not be influenced by such a choice of other validators, as it does not influence the communication between them in any way -- in fact, validators doesn't even have explicit mean of checking confidence thresholds chosen by the others. 

Reviewer 2: "explicit mean" → "explicit means"

    \item {\bf Block.} In case a unit is produced by the validator appointed to produce a block at a given time, it is included in the unit. 
\end{itemize}

All units to be considered correct must also a digital signature by its sender.
%
We denote the sender (creator) of a unit $u$ by $S(u)$.
%
As a given unit can only refer to previously constructed units, the citations contained in units can be seen as edges in a DAG (directed acyclic graph).

In the protocol it will be often important not only whether a given unit $u$ cites directly some other unit $u'$, but whether there is a provable casual dependence between them, i.e., whether it can be proven that during the creation of $u$ its creator was aware of $u'$.
%
Such a notion is easily captured by the existence of the chain of citations connecting $u$ and $u'$.
%
In the presence of such a chain, we say that the unit $u$ is a  \emph{justification} of unit $u'$ or, in other words, that $u'$ justifies $u$.
%
As the justification relation is transitive, we interpret it as a partial order on the set of units and denote the fact that $u'$ justifies $u$ by $u'\leq u$.
%

> We denote the set of all units strictly smaller than $u$ in this order, i.e., its \emph{downset}, by $D(u)$, and the set $D(u)\cup\{u\}$ as $\bar{D}(u)$.

Reviewer 2: I guess [the technically correct terms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Upper_set#Upper_closure_and_lower_closure) would be "strict lower closure" (for `$D$`) and "lower closure" (for `$\bar{D}$`). But it's certainly _a_ downset, too, and "downset" is much shorter, so I'm fine with it. :+1: 
(@xcthulhu might not be, though? :grimacing: )

(On the other hand, our definition of "protocol state" now exactly matches the original meaning of "downset".)

Reviewer: I think we should go with _strict lower closure_ and _lower closure_.  The lower closure of `S` is `$\downarrow S$`.  The order theory literature doesn't often refer to strict lower closures.  Perhaps we could write `v < u` rather than `v \in D(u)`?

Protocol states are downsets, that is the correct use of the term.

Author: Even besides the fact that we explicitly agreed to use the 'downset' on a call specifically devoted to the unification of terms, I find the proposed change problematic.;) We usually write $v < u$ rather than $v \in D(u)$ anyway, but such context is by far not the only one in which the notion of a downset is used - quite often we just want to say that the whole D(u) (or \bar{D}(u)) has some specific form, or is a subset of some other set, etc. 
We quite desperately need notation for what is now denoted as D(u) (which is much more prevalent in the paper than \bar{D}(u), although the second one is also used over 10 times), and unfortunately the traditional order theory does not provide it. Using \downarrow as a notation for _strict lower closure_ instead of a _lower closure_ would be probably much more misleading to people accustomed with the usual notation than what we use now. 
And while I know that usually downset means something different, intuitively the original meaning is not only not far off from the one adopted in the paper, but also shouldn't cause much confusion - the 'traditional' downset is a property of a set and as such does not accept any parameter. Anyone seeing D(u) (with parameter u) should instantly recognize that we are abusing the notation in some way.
If you have an idea how to solve that conundrum, we're still open to hear it (and change it). I'd like to make just a final note - changing the most crucial notation in the last stage of paper writing is a rather risky and errogenous practice, so I'd say that unless we find something that is clearly better, staying with the current choice is optimal from the perspective of paper quality.

%
As a consequence, the units created by honest validators always form a chain.
%
Note that malicious nodes can still deviate from this rule, and hence the following definition.

\begin{definition}{\bf (Equivocation.)}
A pair of units $(u,u')$ is an \emph{equivocation} if $S(u)=S(u')$ and $u$ and $u'$ are incomparable by the relation $\leq$. In such a case, the sender $S(u)$ is called an \emph{equivocator}.
\end{definition}

% For a given protocol state $\sigma$ we denote the set of proven equivocators as $$E(\sigma) = \{v\in V| \text{There exists } u,u' \text{ created by } v \text{ s.t. } u\not\leq u' \text{and } u'\not\leq u\}$$

For a given set of units $\cS$ we denote the set of proven equivocators below it as $$E(\cS) \defeq \{V\in \mathcal{V} \mid \text{There exists } u,u'\in D(\cS) \text{ created by } V \text{ s.t. } u\not\leq u' \text{and } u'\not\leq u\}$$

We also denote the set of latest messages under a unit $u$ produced by honest (so far) validators as 
$$L(u) \defeq \{v\in D(u) \mid \cS(v)\notin E(\{u\}) \text{ and } v'>v \!\Rightarrow\! \cS(v')\neq \cS(v) \text{ for every } v'\in D(u)\}.$$

\subsection{Voting via the GHOST rule}

> In this section we introduce the GHOST (Greedy Heaviest-Observed Sub-Tree) rule for fork selection in blockchains and explain how one can concretely implement it using an idea called virtual voting in the DAG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section we introduce the GHOST (Greedy Heaviest Observed Sub-Tree) rule for fork selection in blockchains and explain how one can concretely implement it using an idea called virtual voting in the DAG.
```

% The Highway protocol applies the ''virtual voting'' principle \cite{}, meaning that a given unit $u$ does not need to explicitly carry a ''vote'' for the selected block, but rather such a vote is computed locally by each validator based only on $u$ justifications.

% Each unit $u$ votes not only for one block, but rather for a whole branch starting at genesis and ending in one of the maximal blocks in $\bar{D}(u)$.
% Highway adopts the Greedy Heaviest-Observed Sub-Tree rule of voting, or a GHOST rule, for short.
% It means that the branch voted by each unit is chosen recursively starting from the genesis block $G$, where at each step the candidate that has the most votes of the most recent units is chosen.
% More formally, we recursively define the function $\vote_k$, corresponding to the vote on $k$-th block in the chain, as follows:

% \begin{itemize}
%     \item $\vote_0(u) = G$
%     \item $\vote_k(u) = \min \left(\argmax\limits_{B\in\mathrm{next}(\vote_{k-1}(u))} \ww(\{v \in L (\bar{D}(u)) \mid \vote_{k}(v) = B\})\right)\textrm{,}$
% \end{itemize}

\subsection{Finality condition}\label{sec:finality}

> % \damian{Would be good to write some prose here.}

Reviewer 2: Let's not merge TODO comments, except if the plan is to make a follow-up PR soon.

By taking advantage of the DAG framework, validators are able to compute finality of each block performing only local operations, namely searching for specific structures in their local copy of the DAG. 

\begin{definition}
A $(q,k)$-summit for the block $B$, relative to protocol state $\sigma$ is a nested sequence of sets of units $(C_0, C_1, C_2, \dots, C_k)$ such that $C_0\supseteq C_1 \supseteq \ldots \supseteq C_k$ and:
% with quorum size $q$ and height $k$ for a block $B$, or a \emph{$(q,k)$-summit} for a block $B$, is a sequence of sets of units $C_0 \supseteq C_1 \supseteq C_2 \supseteq \dots \supseteq C_k$ satisfying the following properties:
\begin{itemize}
  \item {\bf unanimity.} $\vote(u) \geq B$ for all $u\in C_0$,
  \item {\bf honesty.} $E(\sigma) \cap S(C_0) = \emptyset$,
  \item {\bf convexity.} $u_0, u_2 \in C_i$ implies $u_1 \in C_i$, for all $u_0  \leq u_1 \leq u_2$ s.t. $S(u_1) = S(u_2) = S(u_3)$,
  \item {\bf density.} $\big|S\big(\bar{D}(u) \cap C'_i)\big)\big| \geq q$ for all $u \in C_{i + 1}$.
\end{itemize}
Where $C'_i = \big\{u\in C_i \mid \text{ there exists } u'\in C_{i+1} \text{ s.t. } S(u) = S(u') \big\}$.
\end{definition}

> Intuitively, summits represent uninterrupted streaks of units produced by big subset of validators (i.e., a quorum) that vote for the same block $B$ --- a structure in DAG after which it is very unlikely that the votes will change, hence summits will be used to finalize blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Intuitively, summits represent uninterrupted streaks of units produced by a big subset of validators (i.e., a quorum) that vote for the same block $B$ --- a structure in DAG after which it is very unlikely that the votes will change, hence summits will be used to finalize blocks.
```

> In particular, as we will prove in the series of lemmas, checking the following condition will suffice to convince the validator that the given block $B$ will not be retracted, unless more than $t$ validators equivocates:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, as we will prove in the series of lemmas, checking the following condition will suffice to convince the validator that the given block $B$ will not be retracted, unless more than $t$ validators equivocate:
```

$$
   \final(B, \sigma, t) \defeq \begin{cases}
    1 &\mbox{if } \text{there exists $(q,k)$-summit for $B$ in $\sigma$ s.t. }(2q-n)(1-2^{-k})>t\\
    0 &\mbox{otherwise}.
    \end{cases}
$$

Now, based on the above definition we will refer to validator $V$ as having block $B$ \emph{finalized for confidence threshold} $t$ if $t$ is an integer value s.t. $\final(B,\sigma,t) = 1$, where $\sigma$ is $V$'s protocol state.

> Next we prove the key technical lemma, showing that after a summit of certain height and quorum size occurs, it is very unlikely for new units to vote against the vote of the summit. 

Reviewer 2: I think it's safe to use a somewhat stronger formulation here, since the exact meaning gets formalized in this section anyway:
```suggestion
Next we prove the key technical lemma, showing that after a summit of certain height and quorum size occurs, new units will not vote against the vote of the summit.
```

\begin{lemma}\label{LemmaSummit}
Let $C = (C_0,\dots,C_k)$ be a $(q,k)$-summit for block $B$, relative to protocol state $\bar{D}(C_0)$, $\sigma\supseteq\bar{D}(C_0)$ be any correct protocol state, and let $u$ be a unit in $\sigma$ such that $D(u)\cap C_k\neq\emptyset$ and $\vote(u)\not\geq B$.
Then $f\geq (2q-n)(1-2^{-k})$.
\end{lemma}

\begin{proof}

Let us define 

> $$A(C_0,u) = E(u)\cup \Big(S\big(\{v\in L(u) \mid \vote(v) \not\geq B\}\big) \cap E\big(C_0 \cup D(u)\big)\Big)$$

Reviewer 2: Can we make the C_0 implicit, now that it's only used within the context of this proof, i.e. call it A(u) instead of A(C_0, u)?

As $u$ is above some unit in $C_k$, we clearly have $| \mathcal{V}_{k-1}|\geq q$.
If all of the validators from $\mathcal{V}_{k-1}$ would keep voting for $B$ or for blocks above it, so would $u$, hence some of them must have equivocated or changed vote.
Let us additionally define $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{eq}}_{k-1} =\mathcal{V}_{k-1}\cap  E(u)$ and $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1} = \mathcal{V}_{k-1}\cap S\Big(\{v\in L(u)\mid \vote(v) \not\geq B\}\Big)$.
As $u$ is above at least $q-|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{eq}}_{k-1}|-|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}|$ votes for $B$ and still votes against it, we have\footnote{Note that the total number of votes counted by $u$ is $n-|E(u)|$}:

\begin{equation*}
q-|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{eq}}_{k-1}|-|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}| \leq \frac{n-|E(u)|}{2} \leq \frac{n-|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{eq}}_{k-1}|}{2}
\end{equation*}

\begin{equation}\label{EquationSummit1}
2q-n \leq |\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{eq}}_{k-1}| +2|\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}|
\end{equation}

\noindent If $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}$ is empty, we have the thesis already, so let us assume that $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}\neq\emptyset$.

> Let then $u'$ be the minimal unit such that $u'\leq u$, $\vote(u')\not\geq B$ and $D(u')\cap C_{k-1}\neq\emptyset$, which is bound to exist by noneptiness of $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let then $u'$ be a minimal unit such that $u'\leq u$, $\vote(u')\not\geq B$ and $D(u')\cap C_{k-1}\neq\emptyset$, which is bound to exist by noneptiness of $\mathcal{V}^{\mathrm{change}}_{k-1}$.
```
I don't think it's unique?

% $$\mathrm{conf_{practical}}(C,\sigma) =  \Big(2q-\ww(\mathcal{V})+2\ww\big(E(\sigma)\big)\Big)\big(1-2^{-k}\big),$$

% Note that the confidence computed by the above definition is monotonic in the sense that whenever an additional equivocator $V$ is revealed in the bigger protocol state $\hat{\sigma}>\sigma$, one can reduce the previously found summit $C$ into $\hat{C}$ by removing units produced by $V$.
% Then, $q$ will be possibly reduced by one, but it will be compensated by the $2\ww\big(E(\sigma)\big)$ factor in the equation.

% The following refined version of the Lemma \ref{LemmaConfidence} describes the security guarantees obtained by the validators searching for honest-so-far summits:

% \begin{lemma}[\bf practical confidence]
% Let $C = C_0\cup\dots\cup C_k$ be a $(q,k)$-summit for block $B$ in $\sigma$ consisting solely of honest-so-far validators, and $u$ be a unit such that $D(u)\cap C_k\neq\emptyset$.
% Then either $\vote(u) \geq B$ or $\ww(\mathcal{V}_B) \geq \conf_{practical}(C)$.
% \end{lemma}

> % \damian{Notation for validators/units $u,v$, $V$, $\mu, \tau$?}

Author: No, just bad habits. Overleaf is a very convenient tool when in comes to parallel work on a single document, one thing it's missing though is a solid version control system. As a consequence, if you use overleaf too much you start to think "well, I could just delete this line, but it may become handy later and then it's gonna be hard to restore. I'll just comment it out then".;)

%
Furthermore, assuming as always that there are $f<\frac{n}{3}$ dishonest validators we can guarantee that  the maximum number of incomparable units by the same validator that are simultaneously endorsed is $3$. 
%
We will often think of endorsed units as being certified by a significant fraction of honest validators.
%
While the downsets of other units might be considered suspect (in that they might contain equivocation bombs), endorsed units are considered to be more solid.
\begin{definition}
A unit $u$ is said to cite another unit $v$ \emph{naively}, denoted $u >_n v$, if $u > v$ and there is no endorsed unit $w$ such that $u > w \geq v$.
\end{definition}

Using the notion of naive citation, we introduce a validity criterion for units that allows us to avoid equivocation bombs.

\desc{
\begin{center}
    {\bf Limited Naivety Criterion (LNC) } 
\end{center}
A unit $u$ by validator $V$ is considered incorrect if there is an equivocation $(v_1, v_2)$ (created by some validator $W$) and two units $u_1, u_2\leq u$ created by $V$ such that 
$u_1 >_n v_1$  and $u_2 >_n v_2.$
% $v_1 <_n u_1$  and $v_2 <_n u_2.$
}

> Since, as previously noted, endorsed units, and thus also naive citations are subjective notions, also satisfaction of LNC by a given unit might depend on the local view of a validator.

Reviewer 2: Was that previously noted? Maybe that got removed?

It would also be important to point out that a unit can only change from LNC-invalid to LNC-valid and not the other way round, as we gather more endorsements.
I.e.: Not only do we keep _valid_ units in the buffer until we can _cite_ them without violating the LNC ourselves (as already explained below); but we also can request missing endorsements from the sender of a seemingly _invalid_ unit, to prove to us that it complies with the LNC after all.

Author: Just after the definition of ENDORSE there is a line "Note that being endorsed is a subjective property as it depends on the local view of a validator.", and that is before the line in question. 
I added the sentence to clarify that the status of a given unit can change only one way.

\begin{itemize}
    \item If we set the $\Delta$ too optimistic (i.e., too low) then liveness might be violated, as some messages between (high ping) pairs of validators ping can arrive too late.
    \item If we set the $\Delta$ too pessimistic, then the protocol might become quite slow, as during significant portion of the round, the validators would stay idle.
\end{itemize}

This motivates the use of dynamic round lengths so that the protocol by itself adapts to the current network conditions.
%
At a theoretical layer this "approach" corresponds to the {\it unknown $\Delta$ flavour} in the original definition of partial synchrony by~\cite{DLS88}.
%
The theoretical model states that there is some fixed, worst case message delay $\Delta$, yet it is not available at the start of the protocol execution.
%
Even though these two models of partial synchrony are equivalent via almost black-box reductions, we present here a custom version of our protocol for the unknown $\Delta$ model that is optimized for practical implementations.

\noindent {\bf Rules for changing round lengths.}

> We measure time in milliseconds since the epoch\footnote{Unix time: number of milliseconds since the beginning of 1970, UTC}.

Reviewer 2: Normally "Unix time" is _seconds_ since the epoch… maybe something like:
```suggestion
We measure time in milliseconds since the epoch\footnote{Unix time: number of seconds since the beginning of 1970, UTC, but millisecond resolution is more suitable for this purpose}.
```

    \item a confidence threshold $t_0$ that is used to measure progress in finalization,
    \item numbers $0<C_{\mathrm{fail}}< C_{\mathrm{succ}} <C$ and $D$, that specify the conditions based on which the round exponent changes.
\end{itemize}

\desc{

\begin{center}
    {\bf Round Exponent Maintenance Strategy for $V\in \cV$} 
\end{center}
% \damian{I wrote a slightly simpler version than what was written here before. I don't think it matters much how this is done. Feel free to roll it back to the previous version. }
\begin{enumerate}
\item At tick $i=0$, initialize $n_v(j)= \nmin$ for all $j$. Initialize $\cntsucc=0$.
\item At tick $i>0$,  let $m:=n_v(i)$. Whenever $i$ is divisible by $2^{m+1}$:
% \item At tick $i>0$,  let $m:=n_v(i)$. Whenever $i$ is divisible by $2^{m+1}$ and $n_v$ did not change in $C$ previous rounds (i.e., it was constant in the interval $[i-C2^{m+1}, i-1]$):
\begin{enumerate}
        \item Let $b_{\mathrm{fin}}$ denote the number of blocks finalized with confidence $t_0$ during the last $C$ rounds,
        \item if $b_{\mathrm{fin}}<C_{\mathrm{fail}}$ then set $n_v(j)=\min(m+1, \nmax)$, for all $j\geq i$,

>         \item if $b_{\mathrm{fin}}>C_{\mathrm{succ}}$ then increment $\cntsucc=\cntsucc+1$, otherwise set $\cntsucc=0$.

Reviewer 2: Both of these could be non-strict inequalities, since above we already require that C<sub>fail</sub> is _strictly_ less than C<sub>succ</sub>.

        \item If $i$ is divisible by $C2^{m+1}$ and $\cntsucc\geq D$, set $n_v(j)=\max(m-1, \nmin)$, for all $j\geq i$. Set $\cntsucc=0$.
\end{enumerate}
\end{enumerate}
}

In practice $t_0$ should probably be much lower than the confidence threshold used for "safety", for instance $t_0\approx 0.01$.
%

> Even if in a single round, the block proposed by the leader gets finalized with the lower confidence $t_0$, if there are enough honest validators this confidence will increase in the future, as the summit grows in height. The constants $C_{\mathrm{fail}}, C_{\mathrm{succ}}, C, D $ are chosen so as to make sure that the "correct" round exponent is learned by the validators based on the "finality rate" feedback.

Reviewer 2: And crucially, to prevent the summit from growing, someone would need to equivocate; and everyone can only _effectively_ equivocate once.

Author: I find this statement problematic. It may happen that there are summits S1, S2, S3 of respective heights 1,2, and 3, and some validator V may be crucial to all of them (it created unit of every level in every summit). If this validator later equivocate, none of this summits will grow any further (or - they will grow, but in a narrower version). And while it still would count as one _effective_ equivocation, it kind of breaks 3 rounds. I'll leave this paragraph as it is for now.

Reviewer 2: You're right… what I meant to say was that: If you equivocate, eventually everyone will have you marked as faulty and you won't be able to break existing summits in future rounds after that anymore.

%
Example values of these constants could be $(C_{\mathrm{fail}}, C_{\mathrm{succ}},C) = (10, 32, 40)$ and $D=3$.

% \damian{I don't think we should write down any arguments for liveness here.}

\subsection{Eras}\label{sec:eras}
Since the Highway protocol is meant for creating and maintaining a blockchain, once run (initialized) it is supposed to run forever, without stops.
%
Consequently, the validators are forced to store the whole DAG, even the units that were created at the very beginning of the protocol execution.
%
Erasing "old" parts of the DAG is not safe, as (likely dishonest) validators might directly cite in their recent units some units that are very old.
%

When talking about storing issue, it is important to emphasize that clearly, the blockchain must be stored anyway, and this is a cost that is impossible to avoid.
%

> However, intuitively, nothing should stop us from erasing old "metadata", i.e., units that have been used to finalize certain blocks, and thus are not useful anymore.

Author: I'm adding the sentence commenting on that at the end of this subsection.

%
In each era, $K=1000$ new blocks are added to the blockchain, and importantly a new instance of Highway is run in every era.
%
This means that, for instance, in era $5$, we consider the block $B_{4999}$ at height $4999$, finalized in era $4$, as the genesis unit.

If we use eras in such a way, then the validators only need to store blocks that were finalized in the previous eras and the DAG for the current era.
%
This also helps a lot with equivocation spam attacks, as equivocators caught in a particular era can be banned from the very beginning of the subsequent eras.
%
The honest nodes start a new era in the {\it relaxed} mode and thus do not need to send endorsements because of past equivocations anymore.

\subsection{Sending Less Endorsements}
Recall that the original endorsement strategy that we introduced in Section~\ref{sec:endorse} was very simple: after seeing an equivocation, endorse every unit by non-equivocating validators.
%
While it allows for quite simple arguments that liveness is preserved, it also introduces a non-negligible overhead in case when equivocations are detected in a particular era.
%

> Below we present a refined strategy that still guarantees that no honest validator gets ever stuck because of lack of endorsements of its own, honest units.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below we present a refined strategy that still guarantees that no honest validator ever gets stuck because of lack of endorsements of its own, honest units.
```
(But better to consult with a native speaker, so I don't make things worse! :sweat_smile: @xcthulhu)

Reviewer: I agree with your suggestion, @afck

%

> At the same time, this strategy allows to send much less endorsements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the same time, this strategy allows to send much fewer endorsements.
```

\item Whenever $V$ sees an equivocation by $W$, add $W$ to $\equivs:=\emptyset$.
\item For every unit $u$ that $V$ is aware of, such that the following conditions are satisfied, $V$ broadcasts   $\eendorse(V,u)$:
\begin{enumerate}
    \item The creator of $u$, $S(u)$ does not belong to $\equivs$.
    \item There exists a validator $W\in \equivs$ such that
    \begin{itemize}
        \item $W\notin E(u)$,
        \item There is a unit $w$, created by $W$ such that $w\in D(u)$ but the unit $u'$ created by $S(u)$, just before $u$, does not cite $w$.
    \end{itemize}
\end{enumerate}
\end{enumerate}
}

In a practical scenario, after an equivocation by a validator $W$ is detected at round $r$, then after a few rounds no honest validator will cite any new units by $W$ anymore.
%
The above strategy requires, in such a case, sending endorsements only for units created in these few rounds that happen after round $r$.
%
The honest units that are created later, never cite any "new" units by $W$ and thus do not require endorsements.

\subsection{Weighted Consensus}

So far it has been assumed that the opinion of every validator is equally important in the process of achieving consensus.

> In this subsection, we describe the modifications allowing the Highway protocol to be run in a scenario where each validator has an associated integer weight, corresponding to its voting power -- a useful version for example when constructing a proof-of-stake blockchain. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this subsection, we describe the modifications allowing the Highway protocol to be run in a scenario where each validator has an associated integer weight, corresponding to its voting power -- a useful version for example when constructing a Proof of Stake blockchain. 
```
(Or at least we should spell it the same everywhere.)

Let the sum of all validator weights equals $N$, and the function $\ww(V)$ denotes the weight associated with validator $V$.

> In such version, the function $\mathrm{total}$ being the basis for the GHOST rule has to be replaced with the one counting the \emph{total weight} of validators supporting a given option, instead of their number. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In such a version, the function $\mathrm{total}$ being the basis for the GHOST rule has to be replaced with the one counting the \emph{total weight} of validators supporting a given option, instead of their number. 
```

Similarly, the \textbf{density} condition in the definition of the summit needs to be replaced with the version bounding total weight of the set of validators  $S\big(\bar{D}(u) \cap C'_i)\big)$, instead of their number. 
After these changes are introduced, Theorems \ref{thm:finality} and \ref{thm:liveness} remain true without any changes, as they do not deal with number of validators, and the proofs do not take advantage of the equal validator weight. 

> Note that while the finality in such modified scenario is purely a function of validator weights, the communication complexity remain dependent on the total \emph{number} of validators -- every validator needs to download unit of every other validator, no matter how small its weight is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that while the finality in such a modified scenario is purely a function of validator weights, the communication complexity remain dependent on the total \emph{number} of validators -- every validator needs to download the units of every other validator, no matter how small its weight is.
```

\subsection{Practical challenges}

{\bf Strong optimistic finality.} While since the initial definition of the partially synchronous model by Dwork, Lynch and Stockmeyer~\cite{DLS88} a vast body of research was created to optimize various parameters of protocols in this setting, most of it was written under the semi-formal assumption that the existence of more than $n/3$ dishonest nodes predates the existence of any provable guarantees for such protocols.
Such an assumption stems from the fact that, as proven in the original paper, it is not possible for a partially synchronous protocol to guarantee both liveness and finality if $n<3f+1$.

In spite of this negative result, it is however possible to provide additional finality guarantees in the scenario where for a prolonged period even dishonest nodes do not deviate from the protocol and actively work to finalize blocks.

> Although it may not seem like an important observation from the perspective of classical security models, we stress that it carries significant practical consequences -- in most cases of blockchain deployments it may be assumed that most of the time basically all the nodes will actively collaborate to achieve consensus\footnote{As most systems reward and punishe validators based on their behavior, offline nodes and small-scale attacks (ones that do not succeed in reverting a finalized block) are strongly disincentivised and hence not common.}.

Reviewer 2: `punishe` → `punish`
